.TH "TRIPLANE" "6"
.SH "NAME" 
Triplane \- a side-scrolling dogfighting game.
.SH "SYNOPSIS" 
.PP 
.B triplane
[\fIOPTION\fR]...
.SH "DESCRIPTION" 
.PP 
\fBTriplane Classic\fR is a side-scrolling dogfighting game featuring
solo missions and multiplayer mode with up to four players. It is a
port of the original \fBTriplane Turmoil\fR game for DOS and aims to
match the original game exactly so that high scores remain comparable
to the original.
.SH "OPTIONS"
.PP
.IP "\fB\-fullscreen\fP"
Start the game in fullscreen mode (this is the default).
.IP "\fB\-nofullscreen\fP"
Start the game in windowed mode.
.IP "\fB\-nosound\fP"
Start the game without sounds.  Note: This option also disables sounds
in the configuration file so sounds will be disabled also the next
time you start triplane.  To enable sounds set Physical
Examination->Hearing->Sounds on in the game menus.
.IP "\fB\-2, -3, -4\fP"
Scale the 320x200-pixel game window 2x, 3x or 4x using software
scaling.  This helps you play Triplane on displays that cannot switch to
such low resolutions.
.IP "\fB\-2svga\fP"
Scale the 800x600-pixel window 2x using software scaling, to
produce a 1600x1200-pixel window.  This resolution is used only in
multiplayer mode.
.PP
Note that triplane does not warn about unknown options.
.SH "GETTING STARTED"
.PP
After starting the game, click through the splash screens to see the
main menu.  Then click \fBROSTER\fP and click the pen on the right to
create a new pilot entry.  Type your name and press enter.  Click the
keys on the left to get back to main menu.  Click \fBASSIGN PILOTS\fP
and check the SOLO check box beside the red plane (top left) to select
the German plane for solo game.  Click on the background to get back to
the main menu.

Click \fBTAKEOFF TIMES\fP and \fBMISSION I\fP.  Read your assignment
carefully and click on the arrows to look around the map.  Your
objective is to destroy the buildings identified by red boxes around
them.  When you are ready click \fBFLY\fP and use the following
controls:
.IP "\(bu press S (roll) to get out of hangar" 4
.IP "\(bu hold TAB (power) down to accelerate" 4
.IP "\(bu use X and W to steer the plane" 4
.IP "\(bu use 1 to drop a bomb" 4
.IP "\(bu use S to roll the plane upside down" 4
.PP
When you have destroyed all the targets try to land by releasing power
and gliding to the runway.  Holding up and down simultaneously
activates the air brake system.  When the plane is stopped on the
runway, press S to re-enter the hangar and resupply bombs and fuel.

N.B.: If you have a new computer you may encounter serious keyboard
errors.  This is due to the cost savings of the keyboard manufacturers.
The current keyboards cannot handle more than 3-6 keys simultaneously.
If you encounter keyboard problems, see the "on/off power" option
below.

.SH "SOLO GAME MODE"
See the "ASSIGN PLAYERS MENU" chapter on how to select the solo game
country.

Winning a solo game requires that:
.IP "\(bu all mission targets have been destroyed" 4
.IP "\(bu all protection objectives are met" 4
.IP "\(bu all enemy airplanes are destroyed, and" 4
.IP "\(bu at least one plane is left and stopped on a runway." 4
.PP
Scoring is mostly based on how many planes you have shot down.  Extra
points are awarded from destroyed enemy ground installations and
infantry without regard to who destroyed them.  You will get penalty
points for shooting down allied planes and for destroyed allied ground
targets and infantry.

.SH "MULTIPLAYER MODE"
See the "ASSIGN PLAYERS MENU" chapter on how to select
players for multiplayer mode and visit the "REQUEST TRANSFER" menu to
select the multiplayer level.

To configure plane controls for multiplayer mode, visit the "PLANE
MECHANICS" menu.  Choose a country and then configure either the
keyboard or a joystick (a game pad is also OK).

If you want to change the keyboard layout for the chosen country,
click the keyboard and you will be prompted to press buttons for all
six controls needed to fly.  The order is Up, Down, Roll, Engine power,
Bombs and Guns.  Remember that brake is always Up+Down simultaneously.

Joystick configuration is still a bit experimental and it is not easy
to play the game with a joystick.  Start by clicking Joystick 1 or
Joystick 2 and follow the on-screen instructions.  There are two types
of joystick actions.  You can hold down a joystick button and press
Space on the keyboard.  Alternatively you can move a joystick to a
different position (left, right, up or down) and press Space.  Finally,
by pressing "D" you can disable a control completely.  You can use this
for example if you have configured up and down actions to be buttons
so that you can hold them together and thus do not need a separate
brake control.  Disabling the roll control enables autoroll, which
keeps the plane upright.

.SH "HANGAR MENU"

This is a special menu.  This appears when the actual game is in
progress.  There are three columns: Bombs, ammo and fuel.  Use the Bomb
and Guns buttons to select one of the columns, and adjust the value
using the Up and Down buttons.  Press Roll or Power to exit, and a
mechanic will push your plane onto the runway.  If you want to return
to the hangar, just press Roll or Bomb, and the mechanic will push
your plane into the hangar.

.SH "ASSIGN PLAYERS MENU"
.PP
This menu is used to select players for solo and multiplayer
modes.  There are four boxes, one for each country.

Inside each box there are four radio buttons and two text fields:

.IP "first radio button (red circle)" 4
This country is disabled.
.IP "second radio button (SOLO)" 4
This country is used to play a solo mission.  Other countries are
automatically disabled.  Remember to set pilot name in the text box to
the right of this radio button.
.IP "third radio button (computer)" 4
This country is played by a computer pilot in multiplayer mode.  The
text box to the right is not implemented.
.IP "fourth radio button (human)" 4
This country is played by a human pilot in multiplayer game.  Remember
to set pilot name in the first text box.
.PP
If you activate the solo mode the computer will automatically adjust
the other countries to NO-PLAYER mode.  (If you want to play the solo
missions, now just exit and click the take-off times flyer in the main
menu.) For example, assume that you want to be the German player, your
friend wants to be the Japanese player and computer wants(?) to be the
Finnish player.  Choose "Human pilot" in the German and Japanese boxes,
"No player" in the English box, and "Computer pilot" in the Finnish
box.

Note: If you select the last multiplayer level (CAVERN) and you set
the computer to be the Finnish or the English plane, these planes will
be disabled when game begins.  (Computers cannot handle takeoffs in
caves.)

.SH "PHYSICAL EXAMINATION MENU"

This is the options menu, where you can define game-related
parameters.  On the right side you can see four tabs:

\fBVISION\fP

.IP "Shots visible?"
If deactivated, no flying ammunition will be seen (planes & infantry).

.IP "AAA shots visible?"
If deactivated, no ammunition of flak battery will be seen.

.IP "AA-Mg shots visible?"
If deactivated, no ammunition of ground machine gun will be seen.

.IP "Flags?"
If deactivated, all flags will disappear.

.IP "Structure flames?"
If deactivated, the bombed structures will not burn.

.IP "Use 800*600 window (in MULTIPLAYER)?" 
Activate this option to play multiplayer games in a 800*600 window.

.PP
\fBHEARING\fP

.IP "Sounds on?"
Activate this to enable or disable all sound.  Note that the \fB-nosound\fP
command line option turns this off.

.IP "Musics on?"
Play music in the menus, if the "Sounds on?" option is also activated.

.IP "SFX on?"
Enable various sound effects in the game, if the "Sounds on?" option
is also activated.

.IP "Explosion sounds?"
If deactivated, a sound will be not heard when a bomb collides with ground.

.IP "Gunfire sounds?"
If deactivated, a sound will be not heard when a plane fires its guns.

.IP "AAA fire sounds?"
If deactivated, a sound will be not heard when ground defenses fire
(machine guns & flaks).

.IP "Water splash sound?"
If deactivated, a sound will be not heard when a bomb collides with water.

.IP "Infantry death sounds?"
If deactivated, infantry soldiers will not scream when they die.

.IP "Do you want on/off power?"
When activated, the behavior of the engine power button will be
dramatically changed.  On/off power allows toggling the engine on or
off by pressing the Power button, instead of having to hold it down.
Use this option \fBif you encounter keyboard problems\fP, because this
decreases the number of keys pressed down simultaneously.

.IP "Do you want a reversed power switch?"
Turns the behavior of the engine power button upside-down: when you
are \fBnot\fP holding the power key down, the plane accelerates.  When
held down, the engine will be deactivated.  This is not the same as
braking, you still need to use Up+Down to brake.

.PP
The following options are for multiplayer only.

.IP "Are all the planes the same?"
Sets all planes' attributes to a specific country.  For example: Choose
the German plane on the left, and every plane has 4 bombs etc.  This
affects all plane abilities.

.IP "Collisions on?"
If active, a collision of two planes results in an immediate
destruction of \fBboth\fP planes.  Both players lose one point in
collision.

.IP "Flying parts?"
If enabled the parts which appear when a plane crashes cause damage to
other planes.

.IP "Battle ends after n points"
End the game after one of the players has this number of points.  The
number can be increased by pressing it with the left mouse button and
decreased with the right mouse button.  UnLtd means unlimited, where
the multiplayer game will not end before you press Esc.

.IP "Alliances enabled?"
Enables alliances.  The sides are selected at the box in the lower left
corner.

.IP "AA-MGs?"
If deactivated, all ground machine gun batteries will disappear.

.IP "AAAs?"
If deactivated, all flak batteries will disappear.

.IP "Infantry?"
If deactivated, all infantry will disappear.

.IP "Unlimited ammo?"
If activated, you can shoot even when you have no gun rounds left, but
you cannot adjust your ammo load.

.IP "Unlimited fuel?"
If activated, the plane will still fly even when you have run out of
fuel, but you always have to take the full load of fuel when leaving
the hangar.

.PP
.SH "PLANE TYPES"
.TS
l l l l l.
Country	Germany	Finland	England	Japan
Ammunition	**	**	***	*
Maneuverability	**	*	*	***
Fuel	**	**	***	*
Speed	**	***	**	*
Bombs	**	*	**	***
Endurance	**	***	**	*
.TE
.PP
The German plane is very deadly in dogfight because it is designed for
it.  It does not have any particular strengths or weaknesses.

The Finnish plane is the fastest and the toughest but it has a poor
bomb capacity and great skill is needed to pilot it because of its low
turning rate.

The English plane never runs out of anything (except bombs).  Its only
disadvantage is the low maneuverability.

The Japanese plane has the biggest bomb capacity and it is even more
agile than the German plane.  Too bad it always runs out of fuel.

.SH "MEDALS, RIBBONS AND RANKS"
Like in a real Air Force, you will be awarded with higher ranks and
medals when you have served your country well.  The medals are shown on
top of your pilot in the roster menu.  Every rank has its own ribbon
which is located beside your pilot in the roster menu.  When you start
a new pilot you have no medals and you have only one ribbon, 2nd
Lieutenant.  When you advance ranks you do not lose your previous
ribbons like you would in real life.

\fBBest pilot in the country - Medals\fP

When you complete a sequence of solo missions (six of them) you will
be awarded the "Best pilot in the country" medal.  Every country has
its unique medal, but the main color of the medal depends on the
country so it will be very easy to see which country has awarded you
with it.

\fBSpecial medals\fP

There are two special medals.  The first is the veteran medal, Golden
Star.  It will be awarded to you when you have flown 1000 missions.  The
second is the hero medal, Silver Eagle.  It will be awarded to the
pilot who has killed the most and died the least.  There is only one
Silver Eagle medal in the world, so be careful, it will change its
owner very quickly.

\fBRanks and their abbreviations\fP

Here is a list of ranks appearing in Triplane.  In the roster an
abbreviation of the rank will be automatically added to your name (for
example: 2nd Lt. Dragst).  Both solo and multiplayer games will affect
it so you probably will not gain a lot of promotions by just playing one
of them.

The ranks are:

.IP "Second Lieutenant (2nd Lt.)"
A simple blue ribbon with one golden column 

.IP "First Lieutenant (1st Lt.)"
A blue ribbon with 1 golden column and 2 stars

.IP "Captain (Capt.)"
A blue ribbon with 2 golden columns and 2 stars

.IP "Major (Major)"
A blue ribbon with 2 golden columns and 4 stars

.IP "Lieutenant Colonel (Lt Col.)"
A blue ribbon with a Golden Shield of the Air Force

.IP "Colonel (Colonel)"
A blue ribbon with a Golden Eagle of the Air Force

.PP
If you are ever promoted to Colonel, you have probably played for some
time.  But remember, it is not impossible to gain it, you just need
play a little longer.

.SH "TIPS AND TRICKS"
.PP
.IP "\(bu Remember that stalling is a VERY good way to brake fast, but do not even think about it unless you can handle the plane very well." 4
.IP "\(bu When flying the Finnish plane remember to deactivate the power when turning." 4
.IP "\(bu There are several \fBAce missions\fP which are quite easy to complete, but great effort is needed for receiving a higher score.  Patriot Flight is a very good example of this, it is possible to get at least 169 points in it." 4
.IP "\(bu The Japanese plane can even outmaneuver the German plane, but only with an empty bomb load.  The German plane is still a bit better in dogfight." 4
.IP "\(bu Remember to use hit and run techniques when playing the Finnish plane." 4
.IP "\(bu There is no need to leave any bombs behind if you are playing with the Finnish plane, because it does not make any difference." 4
.IP "\(bu In the missions with a lots of enemy air activity, try protect your AAAs." 4
.IP "\(bu In solo missions you should learn to use the \fBRadar\fP markers, because that makes it easier to avoid enemy airplanes." 4
.IP "\(bu Avoid shooting too many bullets at the enemy plane, because it will probably explode.  In the solo game you cannot deactivate the part collision, so this is quite vital." 4
.IP "\(bu Remember that Japanese plane will always run out of fuel, particularly with six bombs." 4

.SH "FILES"
.PP
Triplane finds its configuration directory by searching the following
directories in this order:
.IP "\(bu 1) $TRIPLANE_HOME" 4
.IP "\(bu 2) $HOME/.triplane (created if missing)" 4
.IP "\(bu 3) the current directory (if step 2 fails for some reason)." 4
.PP
The configuration directory contains the following files:
.IP "\(bu triplane.cfg" 4
Main configuration file.
.IP "\(bu roster.dta" 4
High score file.
.IP "\(bu keyset.dta" 4
Keyboard configuration file.

.PP
Triplane tries to locate its data directory by looking at which of the
following directories exist, in the following order:
.IP "\(bu 1) $TRIPLANE_DATA" 4
.IP "\(bu 2) TRIPLANE_DATA set at compilation time (if step 2 fails)" 4
.IP "\(bu 3) current directory." 4
.PP
The data directory contains only one file:
.IP "\(bu fokker.dks" 4
Game data file containing levels, graphics and sounds.

.SH "HISTORY"
.PP
The original \fBTriplane Turmoil\fR was developed by Markku Rankala, Teemu
J. Takanen and Henrikki Merikallio. Some work was also contributed by
Risto Puhakka, Antti Lehtoranta and Mikko Kinnunen. 

The portable SDL version, \fBTriplane Classic\fR, was created from the
original source by Timo Juhani Lindfors (timo.lindfors@iki.fi), Teemu
J. Takanen (tjt@users.sourceforge.net), and Riku Saikkonen. We also thank
Timo Lilja for his earlier Xlib porting efforts and Sami Liedes for
spellchecking and optimization ideas.
